# Spaniard shite

Hello, today I started work on this blog for my Spanish class. I didn't do a lot of work. Mainly got a... very 90's inspired stack. 

Quite weirdly so, I've written this in English. Mainly because:
* I know jack shit about Spanish.
* My brain defaults to english for some reason. Specially when programming or playing videogames.
* English is faster to write. No accents, no weird deviations. Even if i am using a operating system (Fedora linux 42) with a superior accent method for accented caracters.

Oh well, let's see how i made this blog.

---

# Recipe on making a blog >:)

## The Before Times

Older websites, before the (dark) advent of JS frameworks were generated in one of two ways: **static files** and **server side templating**. 

**Server side templating** is nice because it reduces the logic that has to be executed client-side. Instead of having to constantly splice and dice the DOM, one can simply go:

```handlebars
// This is sudo code, btw.
{{{#extends: main.html.template}}}

{{{#block: content}}}
	<ul>
	{{#each item}}
		<li>{{this}}</li>
	{{/each}}
	</ul>
{{{/block}}}
```
That is nice? is it not? The data is formatted into the HTML document itself and send out. No code required, just a template. It also avoids the extra round trip of having to fetch that data from the client.

Now, with static files you rely on the client to fetch dynamic data from the server. Therefore, you *do not* have much access to any fancy features such as **modularity** or **inheritance**. developers were capable of getting around this by awful and gross misuse of the humble **Iframe**. Which led to a Russian doll of webpages. 

To achieve the same result as above, you'd have to write some code like this:
```html
<!-- ...Painfully written HTML boiler-plate... -->
<ul id="my-list"></ul>
<script>
	const myListEl = document.querySelector("#my-list");
	const items = fetch("[SERVER]/api/data").then(r => r.JSON());
	items.then(
		data => for (let item of data) {
			myListEl.innerHTML += `<li>${item}</li>`
		}
	)
</script>
<!-- ...Painfully written HTML boiler-plate... -->
```

---
## What am I doing...

Well, Since GitHub pages doesn't allow me to run a server but to only serve static files. I *have* to do a lot of fetching. But that doesn't mean I can't use any libraries.

Therefore I AM using templating on the client itself. This is quite cursed but you can get the contents of a given element by accessing it's `innerHTML` property. That allows me to write handlebar templates inside html templates. 

The following is the code used to generate the article cards:
```html
<template id="template-article-card">
	<div class="article-card">
		<h1>{{title}}</h1>
		<p>{{publication}} {{author}}</p>
		<div style="display: flex; justify-content: start; gap: 1em; margin-top: 1em; font-style: italic;">
			{{#each tags}}
				<p style="font-weight: bold; color: var(--text-color-subtle);">#{{this}}</p>
			{{/each}}
		</div>
		<hr>
		<p style="margin-left: 2rem; margin-right: 12px;">
			{{description}}
		</p>

		<button 
			style="margin-top: 2em;"
			onclick="window.location.href = 'article?id={{id}}'"
		>Read More... →</button>
	</div>
</template>
```

---
## Then add magic! 
That is: Marked, Handlebars and Highlight.js! Okay... let's see what each library does.

#### Marked
Used to converted the articles to a format your web browser can handle. Our articles are, right now, written in markdown. 

Markdown is a simple document format. It is used by GitHub, Reddit, Discord and more. Generally to embed styling into sentences, like a horizontal rule, a emboldened **word** there, a *italic* one here, etc, etc.

Here we are using a document editor known as [Obsidian](https://obsidian.md/) to write our articles. 

#### Handlebars
This is the templating engine we are using right now. It allows us to use the nice templating syntax and fill with our fetched data. 

Here: we fetch the metadata from the server. Then we format the template and add it to the page.
```js
async function loadHomePage() {
	const metadata = await getMetadata();

	const articleCardTemplate = Handlebars.compile(document.querySelector("#template-article-card").innerHTML)
	const articleCardSlot = document.querySelector("#article-socket")

	for (let article of metadata) {
		article.publication = new Date(article.publication * 1000).toLocaleDateString()
		articleCardSlot.innerHTML += articleCardTemplate(article);
	}
}
```

#### Highlight.js

This one is the most boring of them all, and a afterthought. It merely but colours the contents of a `<code>` tag inside a `<pre>` tag. Yea, that's it. 

---

### But where do we get the articles?

It's very simple. The website is just a folder of static files. it's laid like so:
```text
root
|-lib
|  -- (all JS libraries)
|
|- (every html file)
|
-- content
   |- metadata.json
   -- (every markdown file)
```

The HTML files are responsible for the `homepage`, and the `article` view's. while `metadata.json` enumerates every article so that the HTML files can render them.

So we just write markdown documents, add their metadata to the JSON file and presto. A new article is available in our sweet little blog.

Oh, and, the metadata is pretty simple information too.
```ts
type ArticleMetada = {
  /** unique identifier.
   * Feel free to make up, as long as it is *unique*
   */
  id: number;

  author: string[];
  title: string;
  description: string[];

  /** Unix timestamp for the article's publication date. */
  publication: number;

  /** URI for the article content. It shall be a markdown file. */
  rel: string[];

  /** Tags used to group related articles together. */
  tags: string[];
};
```

That's it! Now you can make your own blog!!